RULES_YEAR: 2026

OKC Rulebook and Scoresheets
2026 UPDATES:
Adds Card Tracking Sec. 3, sub: “Warnings Yellow and Red Cards” & Sec. 3,
sub: “Obstruction
Removes False Pitch Sec. 4, sub: “False Pitch”& Sec. 4, sub: “Ball”
Modifies Overthrow Sec. 4, sub: “Overthrows”
Clarify Obstruction Sec. 4, sub: “Obstruction”
Clarify Illegal Pitch Sec. 3, sub: “Illegal Pitch”
Increase Overthrow Line to 15ft. Sec. 2, sub: “Overthrow Line” & Sec. 4, sub
"Overthrow"
Clarify Skipped Kicker Sec. 3, sub: “The Kicker”
Clarify Adding Players to Lineup Sec. 4, sub: “Playing the Game”
Clarify Runners Touching Runners is Allowed Sec. 3, sub: “The Runner”
Section 1: Objectives of the Game
● Kickball is a game between two teams of at least 8 players each, played on a
field in accordance with these rules, under the jurisdiction of one or more
referees.
● The objective of each team is to win by scoring more runs than their opponent.
● The winner of the game shall be the team which shall have scored, in
accordance with these rules, the greater number of runs at the conclusion of a
regulation game.
● The ball shall be a 10-inch, red playground ball. The Oregon Kickball Club (OKC)
is responsible for providing bases, balls, pitching strips and cones.
● A maximum of 10 players from one team may be on the field at any given point.
(Minimum of 3 of each gender. Nonbinary players may fill either gender role)
● All players are expected to demonstrate good sportsmanship and to treat other
players and referees with courtesy and respect.
The league will make all efforts to have a complete schedule by two weeks before the
first games. All games MUST be played on the date scheduled barring severe weather
or other catastrophic events.
- In the event of scheduling conflicts that may affect entire teams, opposing
captains can decide to accept a forfeit for the scheduled game, or reschedule
based on the guidelines set forth below:
- Any teams wishing to jointly reschedule a game may do so with the approval of
the board.
- The teams must find two qualified referees willing to ref the game at the time
agreed upon by both captains.
- Since the game will most likely take place outside of a sanctioned and permitted
OKC event, TEAMS ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR ALCOHOL PERMITS (if
necessary) and will not hold the league liable for any fines incurred for violation of
Portland Parks policies.
Section 2: Game Preliminaries
Setting up the Field
A Base is one of four points which must be touched by a runner in order to score a run;
more usually applied to the bags or rubber plates which mark the base points. Bases
shall be set up 55 feet apart (to the back of the base) in a diamond shape with right
angles.
Home Plate consists of two plates set up side-by-side. The two plates are considered to
be one base, with full use by both the offense and defense.
1st base is the first base encountered counterclockwise around the diamond. It consists
of two bases side-by-side, one extending onto the field of play from the foul line, the
other extending into foul territory from the foul line. The left base- the one on the playing
field- is considered usable by both the offense and the defense. The right base is
considered a “safety base” and only to be used by the offense. For the purposes of
safety, if there is a chance of a play at first base, the kicker should run through the
safety base to avoid a collision.
2nd and 3rd are placed around the diamond counterclockwise from 1st; 2nd and 3rd
base each consist of just a single base, respectively.
The Foul Line is the invisible line that extends from home plate through the middle of
the double first base. Another foul line extends from home plate to the outside edge of
3rd base. Three cones shall be placed along each foul line as they proceed past their
respective base in 10-foot intervals to make them more apparent to the referees. Foul
Territory is that part of the playing field outside the first and third base lines extended to
the cones or natural barrier determining the back limit of the outfield and perpendicularly
upwards.
The Overthrow line is an invisible line running parallel to the foul line. Its distance is 15
feet away and into foul territory, extending infinitely. (For more information see
Overthrows in the fourth section of the rules.)
The Overthrow cone is the first cone placed beyond both 1st and 3rd base, placed 15 feet
beyond either base respectively along the foul line.
The Encroachment Line is the imaginary line that runs from 1st to 3rd base.
The Pitching Area is a ten-foot diameter extending from the center of the pitching strip.
The Pitching Strip is defined by two cones placed about 10 feet apart in the center of
the diamond on the encroachment line.
The Catcher’s Box is a square marked out by four cones around home plate. The
dimensions are ten feet by ten feet. The top and the bottom of the square should be
parallel with the top edge of home plate, with home plate being in the middle of the top
of the square.
Required Footwear- Players may not wear shoes with any metal on or in them
whatsoever. If there is a question, the shoes will not be permitted if the ref determines
that the metal can be dangerous to a player. This includes steel toe boots. Additionally,
all shoes must be closed toed and players must wear shoes. If a player is unclear as to
whether his footwear is legal they are encouraged to consult with the referee before the
game.
A player may not be registered on two teams.
Drinking alcohol and/or smoking are not allowed on school grounds. Further, players or
their guests shall not engage in illegal activity while participating or viewing OKC games
and shall abide by the terms of the field permits.
The Home Team fields first. The home team shall be designated by mutual agreement
(coin flip, RoShamBo) before the start of the game by the head referee and one
representative from each team.
Section Three: Roles
Defense: Pitcher, Catcher and Fielder
Pitcher: The pitcher is the defensive player who delivers the ball to the kicker. The
pitcher must have both of their feet behind the encroachment line and must have at
least one foot planted inside of the Pitching Strip as viewed from home plate. If the
pitcher fails to do both of these two things an Illegal Pitch can be called by either ref.
Illegal Pitch: Occurs when either of two things occur:
-The pitcher steps across the encroachment line while in the motion of delivering a pitch
-The pitcher releases a pitch without at least one foot between the pitching cones
No kicker contact is required for an illegal pitch to be called. When an illegal pitch
occurs, the ref will silently raise their hand and wait until the end of the play to make the
call. The result of an illegal pitch is always 'ball’, or the result of the play as decided by
the offense. If an Illegal Pitch and Encroachment occur on the same play, the penalty for
Encroachment will supersede the penalty for the Illegal Pitch (see Encroachment,
below)
Catcher: The catcher is the only defensive player allowed to line up in foul territory, and
in front of the encroachment line. The catcher must remain at least an arm’s length
away from, and behind or to the side of, the kicker until the moment the ball is kicked, or
Encroachment will be called, provided the kicker lines up in the catcher’s box. If the
catcher lines up to the side of the kicker they still must remain behind the back plane of
the kicker’s body. Should the kicker line up behind the catcher’s box, the catcher may
line up at the back line of the catcher’s box, but still needs to be positioned so that they
do not impede the kicker’s path to the pitched ball. As well, if the catcher does not pass
through both the front set and the back set of cones in the catcher’s box, and only if they
are the first fielder to touch the ball in fair territory, they will be called for encroachment,
and regular encroachment rules apply.
At no time may the catcher interfere with the kicker in the area between home plate and
the backstop or cones before the ball is kicked. After the ball is kicked the standard
obstruction and interference rules apply. Only one catcher may play for a team at a
time. If the defense only has 8 players, they can choose to not have a catcher.
Fielder: All other defensive players in the field may position themselves however they
wish in fair territory, provided that they start and stay behind the imaginary line between
1st base and 3rd base until the ball is kicked. Failure to do so results in an Encroachment
call.
Encroachment: If any defensive player is called for encroachment, the referee will
raise their hand silently. Encroachment shall only be called at the conclusion of the play.
Encroachment shall only be called if the kicker makes contact with the ball.
(Excluding when the ball hits the kicker above the waist, resulting in either a strike or a
ball). First offense: kicker given choice of result of the play or a ball. All following
offenses: kicker given choice of result of the play or first base. The kicker must contact
the ball for an encroachment violation to take place. Encroachment calls are issued and
aggregated to entire teams, not individual players.
Exception:
If a Kicker makes a backwards or sideways movement, that the ref deems intentional
to initiate contact in an attempt to draw a Catcher Encroachment call, the Kicker will
be given a single warning for Catcher Inducement, and the Fielding Team may opt to
be awarded a strike in the count or the result of the play. If that same Kicker repeats
the Catcher Inducement violation, that Kicker shall be called out.
Offense: Kicker, Runner, Pinch Runner, Base Coaches, Subs and The Official
Scoresheets
The Kicker: When a player’s name is next in the kicking order, they become the kicker
and step up to the plate to kick. Each player of the offensive team shall kick in the order
that their name appears in their team's kicking order. The kicking order shall be followed
throughout the game. If a player kicks out of turn, then the skipped player shall be out,
and the lineup resumed with the next proper kicker. If multiple kickers are skipped, an
out shall be recorded for each such skipped kicker. Any kicker who kicked out of order
and reaches base, will be removed from base. The first kicker in each inning after the
first inning shall be the player whose name follows that of the last player who legally
completed their time kicking in the preceding inning. A kicker has legally completed their
time kicking when they are put out or becomes a runner. The kicker becomes a runner
when they kick a fair ball. While the kicker does not need to start in the catcher’s box,
they may only kick the ball while they currently have part of their plant foot in the box or
their last point of contact with the ground was legally in the box. Also, any part of the
kicker’s plant foot must not cross the front of the catcher’s box. Failure to either of these
will result in a foul ball if the kicker makes contact with the ball.
When the kicker is running towards 1st base they may run through that base, and as
long as they stay in foul territory they are protected and may return to first base. 1st is
the only base the runner may overrun. If a kicker kicks a ball that is fair but contacts a
foreign object or a player from another game in the outfield, the result is a dead ball –
ground rule double. If the kicker is past 2nd at the time contact with an object is made
they get the base they are pursuing.
The Runner: A runner acquires the right to an unoccupied base when they touch it
before they are out. They are then entitled to it until they are put out or forced to vacate
it for another runner legally entitled to that base.
In terms of 1st base, the kicker should run through only the base in foul territory. If they
are attempting a multi-base kick, they may round 1st using the base in fair territory. The
defensive team may only make outs using the base in fair territory. If the runner uses the
base in fair territory, they are considered to be pursuing 2nd and may be tagged out even
if they immediately move into foul territory.
A runner may not leave their base until the ball is kicked by the kicker. If a runner is
ruled to have left base early, the runner will be ruled out for Leading Off. They will be
called out and the ref will immediately call a dead ball.
The runner may also not leave their base before first touch on a catch. If they leave
early in this case, they need to Tag Up- return to touch the base from which they began
or they will risk being called out. However, it is the responsibility of the defense to
appeal for such an out by, after the play has been called dead, bringing the ball to the
base that the runner supposedly left early and asking for the out. At that time the referee
will then make a ruling as to whether the runner left the base early or not. Although the
out is recorded during a dead ball situation, if the referee rules the runner left early and
is out on appeal, runs resulting from the play do not count if the out was the third of the
inning.
Two runners may not occupy a base, but if two runners are touching a base, the
following runner shall be out when tagged. The lead runner is entitled to the base.
However, if two runners are occupying a base in a force-out situation where the lead
runner is required to leave the base, the lead runner shall be out if tagged.
Runners are allowed to touch each other in the base path, but they cannot pass each
other. A runner who passes the preceding runner is out.
A runner may not advance when the pitcher has control of the ball in the pitcher’s
mound area and is not actively making a play. When the pitcher so ends the play, the
ball is dead, and the runner(s) must go to the base that they are nearest to (unless
occupied) at the time the play is ended. This does not apply to any runner who has not
yet reached their force base, as any runner has the right to attempt the base to which
they are forced even if the pitcher controls the ball on the mound.
Each runner including the kicker may, without liability to be put out, advance to home
base, scoring a run, if a fair ball goes out of the playing field in flight and they touched all
bases legally. If a runner fails to make contact with a base and proceeds to any later
base, they may be called out. It is the defense’s responsibility, in that case, to bring the
ball to that base in appeal. If the referee agrees that the runner did not touch that base,
then they will be called out.
Runners may slide head-first or feet-first into a base or home plate but must consider
the safety of others while sliding. Runners who engage in a dangerous slide, including
but not limited to attempting to “break-up” the play by means of the slide or sliding with
raised cleats, shall be ruled out. In addition, as dangerous slides are considered
unsportsmanlike conduct, the offending runner may also be subject to a yellow or red
card, at the discretion of the referee.
A Pinch Runner can only be used for a runner who is already on base, and only in the
instance that an injury necessitates the need for a replacement runner. The pinch runner
must be the last available player of the same gender in the lineup.
The offensive team may station two Base Coaches in foul territory during its turn
kicking, one near first base and one near third base. The coach cannot interfere with the
play in any manner. If the base coach intentionally interferes with the play, the coach
shall receive a card, be prohibited from acting as base coach for the remainder of the
game, and the ref may issue a do-over or require players to return to appropriate bases.
Subs - If a team is short players, they may borrow from other teams’ players in good
standing, up to the minimum required to avoid forfeit [i.e., 3 males and 3 females]. If a
team's minimum gender requirements are met but the team still has less than 9 players,
a team may add up to 4 subs so that it may field a team of up to 9 players, but no more.
Short-handed teams will incur an automatic out if they use two subs. Teams using three
subs will incur two automatic outs. Teams using four subs (the maximum allowed) will
incur three automatic outs. If a team is incurring multiple automatic outs, the remaining
out(s) will roll over to the next inning if the initial out(s) ends the inning. There is no
penalty for one sub. If a player on the team arrives who is on the team using the sub,
and this player is the same gender as the sub they take the place of the sub in the field
(once the half inning is over) and in the lineup with the sub no longer being able to play.
Penalties for outs will be reduced accordingly. Subs must be placed at the end of the
lineup. If any players of the opposite gender arrive after the game starts, they shall be
placed after the sub in the lineup. During each rotation through the lineup, a team is
required to take the automatic Penalty Out(s) at the end of their lineup. The captain is
responsible for reporting the name of the player the out will be taken after to the referee
and is also responsible for taking the out at the correct time. If a team is using 3 or more
subs, then the opposing captain may file a complaint with the ref. The Ref will have the
final decision on whether that 3rd and/or 4th sub be allowed to play.
Gender Minimums - A team unable to fill the gender requirement (three men and three
women, maximum six men or six women (Nonbinary players may fill either role)) may be
forced to forfeit by the opposing captain. There are no maximums or minimums for
non-binary players. If the opposing captain chooses to allow the offending team to play,
that team is forced to play with the minimums in the field of the complete gender and
take an out or out(s) at the end of their lineup as penalty. A team with less than three
women available will be forced to play with only four men in the field and vice-versa
along with any non-binary players on the team.
Example (A): Team A has only two (2) women available for the game and are unable to
find subs. Team B chooses to allow play to go on. Team A must play with only four (4)
men in the field along with their two (2) women and take an out at the end of their
lineup.
Example (B): Team A has only two (2) women available for the game and one (1)
nonbinary player and are unable to find subs. Team B chooses to allow play to go on.
Team A must play with only four (4) men in the field along with their two (2) women and
one (1) non-binary player and take an out at the end of their lineup.
Changed penalty for not meeting gender minimum to allow teams to play with 9
players as long as both captains agree prior the start of the game. Both teams will be
required to sign each other’s scoresheets as evidence of the agreement. Teams will
still be required to take an out at the bottom of their respective kicking lineups for
each person short, but that penalty can also be waived if the opposing captains
choose.
i.e. If a team has three of any gender they would take 0 outs. Two of any gender they
would take 1 out. One of any gender they would take 2 outs.
Standings and Tiebreakers - During the regular season teams are ranked from highest to
lowest by the ranking points they have accumulated throughout the season.
Ranking points are awarded using the following criteria:
● 3 points for a game win or game win by forfeit
● 1 point for a game draw
● 0 point for a game loss or loss by forfeit
When teams are tied with one another in ranking points, tiebreakers will be used to
determine a team's standings.
Tiebreakers used, and in what order they are applied, are as follows:
1. Head to Head
2. Points Against
3. Power Index
Weighted Games Rankings - At the end of the regular season, four groups of four teams
each will be formed based on the season standings. These four groups will be the teams
ranked #1-4, #5-8, #9-12 and #13-16. While the three weighted games are being played,
teams can only move up or down within their group. For example, a team finishing the
regular season ranked #6 will play the #5, #7, and #8 teams in the weighted games but
cannot jump into the #4 seed nor fall to the #9 seed for the tournament regardless of the
weighted games outcome. (Note: In the 2022 season the standings reset to zero going into the
weighted games, that is no longer the case.)
Tournament Subs - Only players that have participated in 8 games are eligible for
tournament play (exceptions may be approved by the board). All teams have a roster of
21 players and all players wishing to play in the tournament must be in good standing
with the league and listed on an appropriate roster. Rosters will lock with seven games
remaining in the season.
Exceptions will only be made for extreme cases and by the vote of the board so captains
are required to plan accordingly. If a captain believes that a player will miss the tournament,
the replacement must be listed on their roster.
Tournament subs can only be added to reach gender minimums, or a 9 player roster, all other
regular season sub rules apply.
The Official Scoresheet- Each team is responsible for keeping truthful and accurate
scores for their game. Score sheets will be provided by the league at the beginning of
the season, and instruction will be provided by request so that every team will be able to
accurately fill out a score sheet to properly reflect score, outs, innings, cards, and home
runs. The captain will be responsible for showing the score sheet to the ref at the
beginning of the game if requested. In addition, upon the completion of the game the
completed score sheets will need to be submitted physically or electronically to either ref
coordinator in a timely manner by the ref. Captains still need to submit scoresheets, but
in a reasonable timeframe.
The Referee
OKC will schedule a team, which will select two people to referee each game: a Home
Plate Ref and a Field Ref
Captains must present subs pregame and announce themselves as the captain for the
game. They can also present another player as the “acting captain” for that game, this
will be the player that can ‘talk to the ref’ and would take place in all ref discussions.
Only the captain of a team may question the Referee.
Players are encouraged to get rule clarification from the Referee when play is dead
(preferably between innings).
The decisions of the referees are final. However, in the event that the player knows that
the referees’ call was incorrect in their favor (i.e., the ball grazed the runner between
bases, but the referees didn’t realize it and called the runner safe), players are expected
to correct the referees’ mistake.
A Do-Over may be called only by the referees in the instance that they disagree on a
call or feel as though there is sufficient ambiguity about what the right call should be. In
a do-over situation all runners shall return to the base they were at, and the pitch count
returns to what it was prior to the do-over.
During the end of season tournament, the winning team of the first round game between
the 8 and 9 seeds chooses which bracket they will continue into (Championship or
Chumpionship).
Warnings, Yellow and Red Cards
Referees and OKC Board Members have the authority and expectation to issue
warnings, yellow, or red cards to players or spectators for unsportsmanlike or dangerous
behavior. If necessary, it's ok to proceed directly to yellow and/or red card if the behavior
justifies it.
Referees shall stop the game for all red and yellow card infractions.
Red and Yellow cards may be issued without warning or previous citation.
Any yellow or red cards issued in a game should be noted on the score sheet after the game
so the cards can be documented by the OKC Board. The OKC Board will reach out to the
carded player, captains, and refs from the game where the card was given for information
gathering purposes.
Levels of Penalties
● Warning: No penalty, but if behavior is repeated, result should be red or yellow
card issuance
● Yellow Card: Offending player shall sit a full inning- the remainder of the current
half inning and the next half inning. The team may not replace the player
defensively or offensively during the sitting inning. The offending player’s team
will take an out during the next offensive inning they are to play. Defensively, the
offending player’s team can play with no more than 9 players in the field. If the
yellow card is issued to an offensive player during the last offensive half inning of
a game, that player’s team will take an additional out immediately and will not
have to serve any additional offensive penalties should the game go into extra
innings. Furthermore, if the yellow card is issued to a defensive player during the
last defensive half inning of a game, that player’s team will play with only 8
players in the field for the remainder of the inning and will not have to serve any
additional defensive penalties should the game go into extra innings.
● Red Card: Immediate ejection from the current game and, based upon the
decision of the OKC board, subsequent games. Players who receive a red card
may not attend their team’s next match unless given a specific exemption from
the OKC Board. All Red Card suspensions may be reviewed by the OKC Board,
who may adjust the terms and duration of suspensions at their discretion.
If a player receives two yellow cards in the same game, that will result in a red card and
immediate ejection.
If a player receives two yellow cards in a single season, all future cards will result in immediate
red cards. Once a player accumulates two yellow cards within the same season, captains will be
notified for awareness of the automatic red card situation.
Cards and Gender Minimums
If player ineligibility due to card receipt causes a team to become unable to meet
minimum gender requirements, the team shall play down per Additional Red Card
Penalties. Meaning they will have to take an out at the end of their lineup.
Cards and End of Season Tournament
A player receiving a red card in the last match of the regular season is ejected in that
game and is ineligible for the first game/round of the end of season tournament; a player
ejected from the last game of the tournament is not eligible to play in the first game of
the next season for which the player is registered.
A player receiving a red card in the end of season tournament will be ineligible for all
remaining games; their team will be forced to play short during the game in question
and the next game.
During the end of season tournament, the team captains competing in the Championship game
and Chumpionship game must agree on the refs for the game instead of just having them
assigned by the league. If an agreement cannot be made, then the Board will assign the best
possible refs for these games.
Automatic Card Situations
● Unsportsmanlike Communication with Opponent
● Any and all negative communication directed toward the opposing team or the
referee. This may include verbal and non-verbal communication (foul or abusive
language, arguing, questioning, pointing, flipping the bird, etc.)
Kicking, throwing or tampering with the ball during an active game. This may include
kicking or throwing the ball out of play deliberately, popping or purposely modifying the
ball.
Section Four: Playing the Game
A standard game consists of 7 innings of play, but may be shorter due to time, weather,
or environmental constraints. An inning shall not be started after 55 minutes of play.
No team may score more than 8 runs in an inning. If a team scores 8 runs, then their
half of the inning is over. The only exception to this is if it’s the final inning; in the final
inning teams do not have an 8 run cap.
All players must play both offense and defense in a game. All players in the kicking
lineup must play at least one inning in the field on defense, and all defensive players in
the field must be similarly written in the kicking order and must kick.
Players arriving late must be added to the bottom of the kicking lineup and can only be
added before beginning the 4th inning.
Tie games may stand in regular season play. Play-off games must end in a clear winner and
will involve more than 7 innings if necessary. In such a situation, after the 7th inning, the
winner is the team that has the higher score at the end of any additional complete inning. After
the end of the 7th inning, each team on their offensive half of the inning shall start with the final
kicker from the previous inning on second base.
A Called Game is one in which, for any reason, the head referee terminates play. The
game may be called off early in the case of forfeit or the referee’s discretion (lack of sun,
inclement weather, etc.). In the case of a called game, 4 innings of play must have been
completed to count in standings.
A game may be forfeited to the opposing team when a team fails to produce the
required number and gender of duly registered players by 5 minutes after the scheduled
start time or a team falls below the required minimum number/gender requirements due
to the issue of a red card.
In the interests of mercy, no team shall be awarded more than a 10-run differential for
any game for the purposes of rankings, regardless of the final score, (e.g., a team that
wins by 23 points will be awarded a 10-point run differential).
Forfeited games will be counted as a 5-0 game, (+5/-5 points)
At the time set for beginning the game the referee shall call "Play Ball" to indicate the
beginning of the game, at which time the pitcher shall pitch to the kicker.
At the beginning of the game, the pitcher shall deliver the pitch to the kicker who may
elect whether or not to attempt to kick the ball, as they choose. If the kicker does not
kick the ball, either a strike or a ball will be called.
Strike: A pitch that either is kicked at by the kicker and is missed; or is not kicked at, if
any part of the ball passes through any part of the strike zone and it bounces at least
twice before exiting the strike zone. The kicker is out once he receives two strikes in the
same appearance at the plate.
The Strike Zone (see diagram below) is two home plates wide and one foot above each
plate. If any part of the ball crosses through this area and has bounced at least twice
before exiting the strike zone, it is a strike. The back of the strike zone is considered to
be an imaginary line that connects the farthest back tip of the plates, extending to the
outer most edge on the side of each plate.
Ball: A pitch that does not bounce on the ground at least twice before passing
completely through the strike zone, or does not also pass through the strike zone, and is
not kicked at by the kicker, or is any pitch that does not contact the ground at least once.
The kicker is awarded first base (a “Walk”) once the ball count advances to three balls.
If the kicker does kick the ball, either a foul ball, safe, or out shall be called.
Foul Ball:
● A kicked ball that settles on foul territory before reaching first or third base.
● A kicked ball that first falls on foul territory beyond first or third base.
● A kicked ball that while on or over foul territory, touches the person of a referee or
player, or any object foreign to the natural ground.
● A ball kicked above the bend in the knee but below the waist.
● A ball that’s kicked outside of the catcher’s box.
● A kick in which the kicker’s plant foot crosses the front of the plate.
● A ball kicked twice in foul territory.
● A kicked ball that is fielded when the trailing edge of the ball is less than a foot
(12 inches) in front of home plate.
Any ball that touches a kicker above the waist is not considered a foul and should be
called either a ball or a strike. For the purpose of this rule, “above the waist” includes
arms, heads, torsos or any portion of the body not the legs or feet regardless of whether
the body part is elevated above the waist at the time of contact. The kicker is out once
they foul three times in the same appearance at the plate. A runner may not advance on
a foul ball, caught or otherwise.
"Safe" is a declaration by the referee that a runner is entitled to the base for which they
were trying.
An Out is one of the three required retirements of an offensive team during its time
kicking:
● Any ball kicked by the kicker that is caught except a foul ball that has first
touched an inanimate object.
● A runner who fails to tag-up after a fair ball is caught before they, or their base, is
tagged by a fielder.
● A runner not touching a base who is touched with the ball, unless hit in the head
with a ball while standing upright.
Exception: A kicker runner cannot be tagged out after over-running or over
sliding 1st base if they remained in foul territory at all times after touching the
safety base and made no attempt to advance to second.
● A fielder who is in possession of the ball touching a base to which a runner is
forced to run.
● A double-kicked ball where the second touch occurs in fair territory.
● A runner who passes another runner before the preceding runner is out.
● A runner who intentionally interferes with a defensive play.
● A runner who leaves the baseline in order to avoid being touched with the ball.
● A runner who leads off.
Leading off is when a runner leaves the base before the kicker makes contact with the
ball. If a ref sees a runner leading off the ref should call a dead ball and call the runner
out. If the runner is not the 3rd out the count remains unchanged, and the result of the
pitch is ignored.
A Force Out is any runner that is caused to be out before they are safe at a base to
which they are required to run. This is most commonly by the defense tagging a base
but can also occur by a runner being tagged while running to a base, provided they are
forced to run to that base because of the kicked ball. I.E., if a runner is on first base and
the ball is kicked, they are forced to run to second- if they are tagged going to second
base it counts as a force out. However, if a following runner is put out on a force play,
the force is removed, and the runner must be tagged to be put out.
It is important to note that, for scoring purposes, if the third out occurs before a runner
crosses home then that runner does not score. Similarly, if the runner does cross home
plate but the third out occurs by a force out afterwards, then the run also does not score.
A Catch is the act of a fielder getting secure possession in their hand of a ball in flight
and firmly holding it. A catch is legal if the ball is finally held by any fielder, even though
juggled, touched or held by another fielder before it touches the ground. In the case of a
catch, runners must “Tag Up” (stay in contact with the base they were on when the ball
was kicked) until the ball is first touched by a defender but may leave their bases the
instant the first fielder touches the ball.
Dead Ball: When the pitcher has control of the ball on the pitching mound (within the
indicated area) the Home Plate Ref shall declare “time” and the play considered over.
Any base runner that is judged to be more than halfway to the next base at the time the
pitcher gains control of the ball in the pitcher’s circle may advance to the next base. If
the runner has failed to get halfway to the next base, the runner must return to the
previous base. The next base is not automatic and is at the restriction of the runner. IF,
prior to the “TIME” declaration from the referees, a pitcher that has control of the ball in
the pitcher’s circle and decides to make a play on a base runner, the play shall not be
considered dead, and the base runners can advance at their own discretion.
Overthrow: An overthrow occurs when a defensive player kicks or throws the ball that
passes the foul line while between home plate and either overthrow cone and then
travels beyond the overthrow line. A controlled ball possessed by a defender that
crosses the line, is not considered an overthrow.
The result of an overthrow is a dead ball and the runner is allowed the base they are
pursuing. If the runner is returning to the base they had just come from (on a caught
ball) they get that base, and if they are heading towards a base (including just standing
still on a base) they get that next base. If a runner has not yet reached a base by the
time an overthrow is called, runners behind them cannot advance.
Example: A throw is made to first and is errant, going out of play. At the moment the ball
goes 15 feet into foul territory the kicker has reached first base but the runner
that was on first has not yet reached second. Ordinarily the kicker would also be
able to take second because of the overthrow but because the runner from first
has not reached second, they cannot advance, so the kicker may not in this
scenario advance to second.
If a ball is kicked by the kicker and bounces off a runner, it does not count as an
overthrow if it goes 15 feet out of play. As long as it has not touched an object out of
play, the ball is still live.
If a ball is deflected off a runner during a defensive play on the runner, it is considered
an overthrow if it goes 15 feet out of play, and is subject to the overthrow rules.
Intentionally deflecting balls is considered unsportsmanlike.
Obstruction
Fielders must not impede the progress of the runner. Fielders must stay out of the
baseline unless they are actively making a play on a ball kicked by the offensive team.
Setting up in the base path to receive a thrown or kicked ball from a defensive player is
obstruction. Any defensive player determined to have illegally impeded progress of the
runner shall be called for Obstruction and will receive a warning. Each subsequent
infraction for Obstruction will be penalized with a yellow card for the offending player. If
the referee rules that a fielder obstructed a base, the runner shall be awarded any base
they would have attained. An example of this would be if a runner is obstructed at
second base, but then is called out on a close play at home, the runner may be awarded
home because if they had not been obstructed at second, it could be assumed that they
would have easily gotten home. The ref shall have discretion to award any additional
base that the ref believes the runner would have (not could have) been able to reach but
for the obstruction.
Interference is an act by the kicking team that intentionally interferes with, obstructs,
impedes, or hinders any fielder attempting to make a play, either during a live play or
after the kicker/runner has been declared out. If the referee declares interference, all
other runners shall return to the last base that was, in the judgment of the referee,
legally touched at the time of the interference, and the offending player shall be called
out (and if the offending player was already out, the ref may call other outs as
warranted). Interference that is considered to be intentional may also warrant a yellow
or red card, at the discretion of the referee.